[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio
news.
[Music]
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
and I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, do you ever
experience a sudden surge in
geopolitical analysis emails in your
inbox?
Yes, I do. You know, it's funny. Most
years people like, what do you, you
know, the beginning of the year, end of
the year, things are going good, and
it's like, what are you concerned about?
It's like, I'm concerned about
geopolitical tension.
It's just one of these clich.
That's what I always say when I have no
it's like, well, things seem fine, but
I'm concerned. But then some years
clearly geopolitical tension, war etc.
is very real. We recently saw the
bombing in both directions between
Israel and Iran. That seems to be paused
for now. But sometimes geopolitical
attention becomes outright geopolitical
hostility.
Yeah, that was definitely one of those
weeks when we both got a lot of emails.
I have a confession to make, which is I
read all of those geopolitical analyses,
but I always kind of wonder what I'm
supposed to do with that information.
You know, if I were a major professional
investor, if I'm reading a note about
what is the base case for like Iran
versus Israel,
I am not entirely sure how that
influences my own decision-making. Well,
I would say I would take it even a step
backwards and say like, you know, when
we talk to Wall Street analysts, say a
Fed forecaster, I have a sort of I think
intuitive understanding of how they
they're like, "Oh, there's going to be
three cuts in the next year." And then I
generally have a sort of intuitive
understanding of how they might arrive
at that. Okay. We look at statements
from the Fed about what they're looking
for in terms of achieving disinflation.
We look at the trajectory of the US
economy and then we say okay we combine
the Fed statement their sensitivity etc
the reaction function that's the term
I'm looking for with the data and then
we arrive at a forecast when it comes to
something like a war I do not really
have an intuitive understanding of how
the geostrategic or geopolitical
analysts whose notes flood our inboxes
from time to time always during bad
periods how do they arrive at
conclusions therefore X we think the the
war is going to end this way. I do not
know how that can be done systematically
and yet people try.
And actually some of them put numbers
probabilities on specific outcomes. So I
think if I was a geopolitical analyst I
would just put 30% chance on everything.
That seems reasonable.
Yeah. So it used to be that if you were
unsure but wanted to sound smart, you
say 6040. But these days you say 70.
7030 is the new 6040.
That's right. That's right.
But I you know I don't want to be
cynical about it. I am curious about how
one could derive a number from things
that seem wildly uncertain and rare
because there are not a lot of event
studies and every war is distinct and
therefore the idea of trying to
accurately assess the outcome of some
conflict strikes me as very difficult.
Yeah. Well, I am very pleased to say
that we do in fact have the perfect
guest to talk about geopolitical
analysis and how it actually is
calculated I guess or created. We are
going to speak with Andrew Bishop. He is
a senior partner and global head of
policy research at Signnum Global
Advisors. So Andrew, welcome to the
show.
Hi, thanks for having me.
Why don't we just start with what is
Signnum?
So Signnum is a political and
geopolitical risk advisory firm that was
founded in 2018 by a gentleman named
Charles Meyers who was the vice chairman
of Evercore ISI before founding Signnum.
And Charles had a career in banking with
a focus on emerging markets, but was
always sort of one foot in US politics
as a fundraiser, as an adviser to
candidates, etc. And he founded Signum
essentially to try to meld his instincts
about how markets work with his
knowledge about US politics. And from
there, he hired me to help build out the
sort of global analysis beyond the US.
So, I think I started first becoming
aware of your commentary recently
because uh Ozan Tarman, who we've had on
the podcast over at Deutsche Bank, he
started forwarding some of your notes
over and so then I started reading the
stuff and it was like very interesting
and compelling. But why don't you tell
us okay you explained what signum is,
what's your background, how do you
develop an expertise in these areas. So
I joined Signnum from Eurasia Group uh
which is sort of the you know the the
founding house of of political risk. I
was there for four years. I first joined
Eurasia because I'd met Ian Bremer
through a previous job at the World
Economic Forum. So at the Davos
organization and I joined as sort of
right-hand man to their chairman Cliff
Cupchin who really taught me a lot in
that firm in that role. I ended up as
deputy head of research and several of
the things that I learned from Cliff
were for example not getting overly
excited by every new headline. Right. So
I think when especially when you're at
the beginning of your journey
advice for everyone.
Yes. I mean to me the best example of
that is the zero hedge type headline
about how the first gas contract was
denominated or settled in euro instead
of dollar
you know or or just the bricks more
generally. I I you started working when
I was 22. I'm 39 now. the bricks have
had a glorious future for you know
almost 20 years. So that was one of the
things. The other thing that I learned
from Cliff was good analysis. Like
basically the key is to have a rigorous
and an analytical process and even if
you get the call wrong, it's better to
have good analysis and a call wrong
rather than the other way around. Right?
Because otherwise you could just be
throwing darts and you you'd be getting
elections, you know, 50% right half the
time. Right. Which by the way gets to
this question of of what you mentioned
on on the the probabilities. It's
actually harder than just throwing darts
or flipping a coin because most
situations have far more than two
scenarios, right? So it really is a very
very difficult thing to do to predict
all geopolitical outcomes which which
I'm sure we'll get to. But just to to
close off on on you know sort of
background, I joined Eurasia from from
the World Economic Forum and the job I
had there was really fun because
essentially you know the the
organization is best known for Davos.
But the team I was in which was their
global risk team basically send their
team members throughout most frontier
and emerging markets to meet with
government officials, get a sense of
where their head was at in terms of
their country's sort of economic future,
future economic policies, etc. then meet
with the opposition and the business
community and think tank community and
essentially write up scenarios about the
future of that country at a sort of 10
to 20 year outlook. Not trying to get it
right, not trying to predict it, but
trying to essentially force the country
to think twice about its business model.
As you can imagine, a lot of these were
resource dependent countries. And that
led to some pretty interesting
situations. Like one of the projects we
worked on, for example, was about the
future of Ukraine. And that was in 2013
2014. So the project was literally
interrupted by the Maidan revolution.
Half the people on the board of the
project and half the people we
interviewed were you know either fleeing
or put in prison and I remember we were
doing a a panel to to actually introduce
parts of the findings in Davos and the
prime minister of Ukraine his plane was
he was basically disinvited on the day
that the panel was taking place. So his
plane was circling over Zurich, not
being allowed to land, not being allowed
into the room. You know, similarly, we
had back then he was an MP uh Petro
Porchenko who later became the leader of
the country, smuggled in a grenade from
the Maidan revolutions into the
conference hall and sort of held it up
to show how the brutality of the regime
was working. So it was a really great
way to get firsthand exposure to to
frontier markets.
Yeah, that is definitely firsthand
exposure. I'm not sure how I would feel
being in a conference room or like a big
hall with a grenade. I'm hoping it
wasn't live, but who knows? Okay,
Andrew, one thing I want to ask, and I
alluded to it in the intro, is when I
get your research notes, if I am a
typical client of Signnum, what exactly
am I doing with that information, why do
I want to get this analysis? So first
thing is about 60 65% of our clients are
financial investors, right? That Joe
mentioned or or alluded to. Uh about 35%
or so are corporates and they obviously
use us in very different ways which I'll
I'll get into. But I think the first
topic that you all sort of touched on is
is this idea, you know, there's there's
a lot of studies that show that
geopolitical risks just don't affect
markets, right? Like who really cares?
Frankly, oil's pretty much flat from
pre-Israel Iran war. VIX barely picked
up. You know, S&P's at all-time highs.
etc. Obviously, I have a, you know, a
bias or I'm I'm rooting for my own team
here, but I think that that's a little
bit short-sighted for a few reasons. One
is most of these studies typically look
at S&P in the long term. And our clients
obviously are not trading the S&P in the
long term, right? They're trading in the
short term. And you've got some pretty
violent sharp moves up and down for a
lot of these assets. And they're also
trading obviously more niche assets. So
I'm thinking of the travel and tourism
industry or I'm thinking of the oil and
gas industry, Israeli shekele, you know,
things that are far more niche. And if
you look at it at that level, you've got
some major major volatility that can be
both beneficial or or negative depending
on on how good you are at at playing it,
which is really what our our clients are
specialists in. We're not strategists,
so we don't give investment advice based
on the geopolitical research we put out.
The other thing is there's this big, you
know, talking point and it was true
again last month or two weeks ago
whenever um uh the Israel Iran war
ended. There's sort of this like oil
collapses, right? And that's a
counterintuitive outcome. A lot of our
clients were actually expecting that.
And so what they were trying to figure
out was when is this going to end or not
end, but when is it going to culminate,
right? When is going to be the peak fear
level? And that's probably going to be
when Iran retaliates for whatever the US
does. So again, the fact that it
actually drops on the news is not
necessarily surprising to to most of the
folks we we speak to. But Tracy, do you
want me to get into a little bit how the
clients use us?
Yes, that would be great.
Yeah. I mean, so there's a few ways. The
first and I would say least often and
and least sort of savvy or useful way is
for the predictions themselves, right?
So what I'm saying is basically most
clients don't use us for the actual
outcome prediction. It's better if we
get it right. But if they were only
going to use us for that, they could
probably go to prediction markets,
right? I think they're prediction
markets are a little bit overestimated
these days, which we can get into, but
they're not bad, right?
Interesting.
Yeah. So, so the the that's not the main
reason. The main reason that the way
that a client put it to me, and this was
years ago, and it stuck, is like they're
an F1 driver, and we're helping them on
the sort of, you know, the training
tracks, right? like on the on the the
training loops before the actual race to
literally memorize every single turn and
know when they can accelerate, when
they've got to cut a corner, etc. So
that when the events start unfolding,
they're already prepared to, you know,
hit the brakes or accelerate depending
on what's happening. The difference
here, of course, is that the track is
not fixed. But the point is, you know,
in a situation like Israel, Iran, you've
got multiple calls, right? Or multiple
call basically just means prediction.
You've got multiple situations. So
you've got is Israel going to strike?
Then you've got the question, okay, so
we know they're striking. It's all over
Twitter, etc. Is this a shot across the
bow or is this the big one? Is the US
actually going to get involved after 12
hours? Is Iran going to retaliate
forcefully or in a, you know, symbolic
way? Is this war going to last 3 days or
is it going to last 3 weeks? Is the US
going to get involved at that point? You
know, and so on and so forth. And so
they're not like most clients don't
expect us to get every single one of
those calls right. I mean, that would be
insane. What they want is for us to lay
out arguments that are not necessarily
just convincing, but that help them do
the the mental gymnastics around all the
possible outcomes. And then, of course,
it's better if you get it right.
Wait, I have a very short quick
question. Do you see anyone in your
clients who are actually in the
prediction markets looking for
opportunity there yet? Because some of
these are getting to be big size and or
do you see this as a future growth area
for you? people looking for mispriced
contracts on the prediction markets.
So you mean clients that would actually
be putting on trades?
Yeah. You say there's 40% of X
happening, the prediction market is 60%.
Maybe there's an opportunity. Anyone
doing that yet?
So short answer is that I'm aware of no.
And the main reason is still liquidity
despite the fact that it's getting
bigger as you say.
What's really interesting of course is
that that would disintermediate the
market's reaction function.
[Music]
So, I'm looking back at a note. This is
just a random one that I found in my
inbox, but there were several that I
read in July or sorry,
in June.
In June. By the way, I should say we are
recording this on July 1st. And given
that the world is an uncertain place by
the time this episode comes, and I don't
know the exact date, who knows what's
going to happen by the time you're
listening to this, but I'm reading a
June 16th note, and you gave these odds.
20% preemptive Iranian capitulation, 45%
Israeli mission accomplished, followed
by Iranian capitulation, 25% chance US
intervention, and 10% Iranian nuclear
breakout surprise. Why don't you go give
us through your thinking in the middle
of June, how you arrived at some of
these numbers and then given where we
are today on uh July 1st, how did you do
uh or what surprised you or what didn't
surprise you? Talk about sort of where
you were then and where you are today.
So the first thing is Tracy was asking
about how do we ascribe probabilities
and there's I I could give you a fancy
answer about Monte Carlo simulations
etc. But the reality is neither we nor
as far as I'm aware anyone in the sort
of market actually models this stuff and
the few that do use predictive analytics
rather than historical data. And the
reason is there just aren't that many
case studies to go off of. Right? So
let's just get that out of the way.
So the the way we use probabilities and
I'll I'll absolutely answer your
question about the that specific case
study in a second. Sure.
But there are three main ways that I
think the probabilities can be useful.
The first is if you're drawing out
scenario trees and you're assigning
prob, you know, before you publish,
right? You're assigning probabilities to
various sub events before getting to the
total cumulative outcome. Basically, if
the math doesn't add up, that can
highlight a problem in your logic,
right? It's not a math problem. Who
cares if the math doesn't add up from a
mathematical standpoint? But if you end
up with above 100 or below 100 or
whatever, that means that you're
probably overstating one aspect of the
of the dynamic or understating another.
That's one. A second that can be quite
interesting and problem, you know, not
problematic but useful for the user is
clustering. Right? So we had a recent
scenario or recent situation with an
election I think it was in Uruguay where
the base case was perhaps market
constructive but if you aggregated all
the non-base case scenarios you actually
had a more likely outcome of a market
negative bottom line right so that's
those are a few of the ways now the way
that I would approach a situation like
the Israel Iran one is basically break
it down into an equation so if you're
trying to answer the question is the US
going to intervene in the war and bomb
for right.
Yeah.
To me, the odds of that would be you
start with 100 and then you take out
whatever the odds are that Iran is going
to capitulate at the diplomatic table.
So, you know, we can talk about how how
you can come up with that view, but the
idea is are the Iranians going to take
the diplomatic offramp that Trump is
giving them on that Friday in Geneva,
right? So, those odds might be low, but
they're not zero. So, you get to say
20%. Now that leaves you with 80%. Of
that the question becomes is Israel
going to basically finish the job on its
own right i.e. can the Israelis
destroy Ford on their own either through
bombing without the most advanced bunker
busters or through a ground operation
like they conducted in Syria the
previous November which is something
that I and a few others had on on their
radar. And if they can't then presumably
the president will will intervene. Right
now, you were asking about scoring
myself. That's a perfect example. Those
odds get you below 50% of US
intervention. You on top of that have to
add the fact that the president might
want to intervene even if he doesn't
have to, right? Because you might see
political opportunity and being
associated with a victory. And that's
the part that in this instance, for
example, I' I'd underestimated.
Now, where it gets really interesting,
and I'll stop here. What gets really
interesting is even if your take is that
the president is actually not dying to
get involved and that he doesn't really
see this as a big opportunity and you
therefore only ascribe it, you know,
whatever 30% odds, you're still going to
end up above 50% overall.
So that can tell you that because there
are so many ways of getting to an
outcome, you can get tipped over 50
without it being your your modal
scenario. And same with odds of regime
change. You can get regime change
through a palis coup. You can get regime
change through Israeli bombing. You can
get regime change through a revolution.
Our base case was that there would be no
regime change in Iran. And I think
that's that's what played out so far.
But the point is you got to compound all
those odds because they're independent
variables.
Okay. You have the probabilities. I get
that the way you just laid it out was
very clear. But how do you actually come
up with I guess the range of scenarios
because that's what seems practically
unlimited nowadays. And also you
mentioned Trump just then in Trump world
I kind of feel like anything is possible
right like there are a lot more tale
risks out there that now seem you know
plausible in various ways. How do you
take into account the unpredictability
of anything can happen and then how do
you actually confine yourself to this is
a set of realistic scenarios that I'm
going to talk about. So, first thing I'd
say is to me that's one of the reasons
why prediction markets aren't that
useful yet and especially to to clients.
They can actually be ironically more
useful I think to the analyst than than
to the recipient or user of the final
product. And what I mean by that is the
prediction markets will tell you where
the tariff level is going to end up on
July 31st, right? But what if the cutoff
that's relevant is not July 31st? what
if it's, you know, a completely
different date because Trump is visiting
like let's say that it's it's a
ceasefire in Gaza and the cutoff date is
Trump's visit to Saudi Arabia or
whatever. So the point is the rigidity
of the prediction markets and it's a
trade-off, right? Because the the reason
they do them that way is so that they
can be easily falsifiable and you can
compare predictions etc. But that
rigidity I think narrows the value. So
then to your question on how do you even
frame the frame the issue that's a major
problem for Trump tariff situations
indeed. So if you take July 8 for
example you can't really and and we've
you know we've struggled with this
everyone does it's hard to make a call
on whether he is going to escalate or
postpone his deadline because there are
60 countries involved. So first of all
you theoretically would have to make 60
individual calls right or predictions.
Second thing is what if he says, you
know, we're escalating the tariffs, but
they're kicking in on July 15th. Is that
a punt or is that him actually having
increased the tariffs and so on and so
forth? So, I mean, the short answer,
Tracy, is there is no perfect way of
doing it. And that's actually been one
of the issues with Trump is that framing
the initial question is almost as hard
as predicting his behavior. Trade,
ironically, is one of those situations
though that we've had a pretty good
track record with. So I'm happy to talk
a little bit about how we've tried to
like get into Trump's brain if you want.
Please.
Yeah. So there are a few things. So the
first is you can observe patterns,
right? So Robert Armstrong had sort of
this huge success with the taco label.
That was amazing marketing, but I have
to say we were a little jealous because
I think he wrote that in early May and
in early April we put out a table with
basically every one of the Trump
threats. I think there were like 23 or
so.
Doesn't matter if you don't market it.
It's all about that. It's all about that
acronym. Anyway, keep going.
I I was waiting for the invite. Um, so I
think Trump had backed down in 21 out of
23 threats or something like that,
right? So, the first thing is you can
identify patterns. And in fact,
actually, truth be told, we we ran that
same study at the very end of his first
term as well. And the takeaway was very
very similar. The question I think was,
was he going to be tougher his second
time around? Right? But the point is,
you can identify patterns. So, Taco is
one of them. Where it gets complicated
though is, you know, it's almost like
the the Economist or Time magazine cover
phenomenon where by the time the taco
thing came out, whether it was from us
or or from Armstrong, it was already
fading. It was already getting arguably
less true because if you look at the
pattern of Trump's behavior on Jan 20,
he had made a bunch of threats against
Mexico, Canada, China, etc. He
completely let them go, right? Nothing
happened. He didn't even mention them on
Jan 20. Then he postponed them to
February 1. He went one step further. He
actually signed the executive orders but
nothing happened. Then March 1 comes
around or March 4 rather and he actually
implements the tariffs but he walks them
back after a day. Then April 2 comes
around and he walks it back after a week
on rest of the world and a whole month
on China. So the point is there are
patterns but you've got to constantly be
reassessing them because the rule that
worked yesterday may no longer work to
today. Right? A second question is or
principle let's say is we've been very
we've tried to be very nimble and not
have a grand theory right so this gets a
little bit to the whole like Phil
Tedlock fox versus hedgehog like not be
too attached to grand ideas but look at
each prediction individually one of the
things that's really driven me crazy is
this narrative that Trump's trade
approach is all about China right that
is totally accurate over the course of
four years it is totally useless in the
short term because if I told you that
Trump's trade policy was going to be all
about China, which in hindsight is
correct, right? China's got a 45%
tariff. Everyone else has a 10% tariff.
But if I told you that on January 19th
and you were, you know, running a hedge
fund, you would have been very, very
surprised that the first 3 months of the
Trump administration were all obsessed
with Mexico and Canada. Basically, this
whole China lens would have been useless
up until April. So that's a second thing
is trying not to take an overarching
view but look at it individually and try
to figure out what's he after in this
specific case. So you know the best
example is if you think he's after
tariff revenue then he's by definition
not going to back down. You can't get
revenue if you back down right and a
same country can be affected by
completely different motivations or or
you know confrontations. So Mexico in
the first 3 months was affected by
fentinel and immigration concerns which
were pretty clearly I mean it's always
easier to say in hindsight but pretty
clearly transactional like Trump just
wanted to be able to say that he had
done something about those issues. The
way that Trump is going to approach
Mexico in Q4 this year to try to get
them to do USNCA revisions and open up
their energy market and change their
rules of origin on auto sector issues.
That's going to be much much tougher.
Right? So, same country, totally
different approach. Another is there's
this big like talking point, you know,
don't take Trump literally, but take him
seriously.
We hate that one around here.
Okay. So, yeah. So, so first of all, we
know not to take him seriously because
of taco or or you know, signum pre-
taco. But I actually think taking him
literally has been reasonably helpful
him and some of his advisers, those who
repeat his views. So, people like Bess
and Lutnik, they actually don't repeat
his views. They kind of freelance. But
if you take Carolyn Levit, one thing
that really sort of struck us was I
think it was on before the February 1
deadline rather than the March one, but
I could be confusing them. She said
there in that press conference the day
before on the Friday, she said there is
absolutely nothing that Canada and
Mexico can do to prevent the president
from signing the executive order
tomorrow. Signing the executive order.
They never said they were going to
actually implement the terrorist, right?
And I know that sounds like a little
cute or Yeah. But there there is
something to that effect. And and if you
listen to Trump, I think it's quite
interesting. If you also look at how his
advisers, how he lets them talk, like
speak, you know, what kind of leash
they're on, they are allowed to say
anything, including the craziest stuff,
as long as they don't reduce his
optionality, right?
So, he benefits from them going nuts as
long as he doesn't get cornered by their
comments.
[Music]
Let's go back to uh the recent war and
something I'm interested. So looking at
the cumulative odds, you 20% preemptive
Iranian capitulation, 45% Israeli
mission accomplished. when you're coming
up with those odds, like how much do you
really have to know about the size and
scale and quality of the respective
weapon systems of Israel and Iran?
Because ultimately to some degree prior
to the US intervention, the question was
the degree to which one side's missiles
or their missile defense was stronger
than the others. So, how do you learn
about that and how important is it to
actually have really high quality
information about each side's arsenals?
So, that actually gets a little bit back
to what is Signum and who who we are
because I'd say there are different
types of shops in in our industry,
right? There are shops that are based on
Intel, right? So, it's like what we're
hearing in Congress or I play golf with,
you know, Scott Besson or whatever.
That's not us. We do access events and a
bunch of, you know, really cool stuff.
We took clients to Ukraine to meet with
the Ukrainian government and get a sense
of what post-war reconstruction type
policy might be. We do that stuff, but
it's not part of our research, right?
And that's because intel, in addition
to, you know, potentially if you've got
MNPI, etc., that that gets legally
dubious. In addition to that problem, it
doesn't make for good predictions,
right? Because Scott Besson himself
didn't know on April 8 whether Trump was
going to back down the next day. He knew
he was working on him, but he didn't
know. Assad was not sure whether he was
going to be toppled or not. Right. So,
there's that. And then there are shops
that are very focused on country
expertise. So, it's like, you know, I
lived in Venezuela for 15 years, so
here's my take on whether Huaido's coup
is going to succeed or not. And don't
get me wrong, like, we've got regional
experts. We have a Mexico office with a
Mexican guy leading it, years and years
of experience in LAM, etc. So, it's not
that we don't do that, but the point is
where we think our value ad is is on the
process. And we've basically adopted
like a few principles. One is the Phil
Tetlock principle that I I mentioned
earlier which is it's not really about
who you are it's how you proceed right
so it's precisely what is your model
like what is your process and that's
where another guy comes into focus which
is Brisbeno de Mskita that a lot of
people will know about political
scientists very focused on essentially
the logic of political survival right
like leaders will always put their own
advantage ahead of anything and that's
why you know you've got situations where
like Netanyahu is never going to agree
to a hostage deal because it would risk
his coalition. And why would he risk his
coalition or, you know, why would he
risk losing power just to satisfy Trump?
That's where it gets interesting though,
is none of these rules is failroof,
right? Because using that logic, one of
the push backs I got on on our ceasefire
calls in the past was why would Hamas
ever give up the leverage of hostages,
right? And that sounds like a
conversation and the truth is they've
given up hostages twice now, right?
You've got to stay like pretty nimble
and humble. there there is no like
perfect answer but that sort of process
approach can can be helpful. Now to get
back to your initial question about like
how much knowledge you need. You do need
technical knowledge but you don't need
to have it inhouse. So we don't ever
outsource any of our analysis like no
one external has ever come up with a
prediction for us or written any of our
notes.
But what we do is we break down a big
issue into sub questions and then we go
out and try to find the answer. And some
of that will be in open source. Some of
that will be trying to speak with an
expert on XYZ missile range. So yeah,
the answer is you do need it, but you
can break it down and not make it part
of your core business model and instead
just sort of have it as a research
process.
You mentioned being humble just then.
And I'm wondering, so you know, in the
Iran situation, you published
probabilities and your base case and all
of that. and I think events didn't pan
out quite the way you expected. What
happens when you're just wrong about a
particular prediction? So, you know,
you've laid out your analysis, maybe you
had a really great way of reasoning
around scenarios and things like that,
but nevertheless, something happened
that you did not expect. What do you do?
So, there's a couple answers to that.
Well, there's several. The the first
couple are deflection. The third is the
real answer. Um, so one is in any of
these situations, you've got lots of
different predictions, right? So, for
example, we didn't expect that Trump
would actually go in and bomb Ford out
because we expected the Israelis to do
it on their own. But we were on the
right side of the regime change call. We
were on the right side of the Hormuz
call. We were on the right side of
Israel staying away from trying to knock
out Iranian oil production, which looked
hairy during that first weekend, and so
on and so forth. So, that that's one.
The second is you basically have to try
to figure out why you got it wrong,
right? And from there you can typically
learn something for the next time. So in
this instance, for example, I was far
too focused on the Israelis capabilities
and whether or not the Israelis were
going to be able to do this on their own
and not focused enough on Trump's
appetite to get involved for political
reasons. Right. Where it gets really
ironic is part of the reason I was of
the view that the Israelis would be able
to go out and knock out Florida on their
own is because for the previous 12
months I've been telling clients the
Israelis have the capability to strike
Iran on their own and they are going to
do it and it's going to be a bolt from
the blue. I didn't expect it to be
exactly when they did it because the
nuclear talks were still ongoing. But
the point is back then the big push back
I would get constantly was the Israelis
don't have the planes to reach Iran.
they don't have the refueling
capability, you know, and so on and so
forth. And so that gets back to this
thing that there is no like one rule
that you can like, you know, to to sort
of one rule to rule them all, right?
There is no such thing. You've got to
constantly be reassessing. You know,
when we talk to economists and market
practitioners, you know, one of the
terms that comes up a lot is regime
change. And I obvious in this case I got
to be careful. I don't mean literally
like the question of whether the Iranian
regime changes but this idea of like
regime change in markets like oh does
the relationship between bonds and
stocks change over time or is the Fed in
inflation fighting mode or deflation
fighting mode whatever like these are
certain relationships relationships
change and I'm curious like there are
many people who perceive in perhaps the
medium-term future that maybe the
USIsrael relationship is going to change
that maybe there are parts of growing
louder contingents within the Republican
party and both parties really, but
within the Republican party that do not
want to deploy US military assets or
resources in the same way, the same
level of support to Israel in the past.
And who knows how that is going to
transpire, but I'm curious like how you
think like, okay, there's some
relationship the two countries might
have, but all relationships could
change. And if that relationship does
change, then it changes the short-term
expectation on any given war. And so I'm
curious in your process or internally
you think about this idea of
relationship regime change and could at
some point down the future and we don't
know when could some of these alliances
or partnerships or you know friend
relationships change and then that force
a calculation change when an acute event
happens?
It's a great question but I would say
that there is a pretty big difference. I
I think I mean I'm not I'm not in the
markets but I think there's a a big
difference with financial markets which
is the regime changes happen but they
happen much more slowly
and so you have a lot more time to bake
them in right so you know you started
the podcast by sort of talking about how
there are these like talking points that
come up over and over right the the
world like geopolitical risk is going to
be big in 2025 right
a big one of those is multipolar world
right or zero world like this idea that
it's like the breakdown of global order
and so on and so forth So those only
happen every 20 or 30 years
or that the US may not want to be the
hedgeimon at some point that it may not
have the same appetite to be a global
police. And so for example, you know,
the Tucker Carlson wing of the
Republican party very loud against this
idea like why should the US have such a
global military footprint? Things like
that. At some point that could be a
dominant strain of thought and we if it
becomes one, we might not necessarily
know when the flipping point is.
Totally agreed. But going back to how
it's a slow process,
I think Trump was a really and like
literally what happened over the past
month was a very very good test case for
that, right? And the fact that Trump
himself who is known to be not just
isolationist but also pacifist, you
know, one can chuckle, but like he does
have a pacifist instinct, I think, and
pretty stingy in terms of use of
American power and use of American money
and resources, etc. The fact that even
he intervened I think tells us something
about how slow that process is going to
be.
Sure.
Okay. We mentioned cliches a couple
times and I think this is probably a
cliche too, but you know cliches can be
true. Maybe that's why they become
cliches. But when it comes to
geopolitical risk analysis, do things
feel more difficult to you nowadays
versus when you perhaps started in the
industry? Does the world seem more
complex? And I guess given the Trump
administration and some of the
unpredictability that we discussed
earlier, do things seem more volatile,
more uncertain, and just harder to sort
of get a handle on?
Yes, I think that is absolutely fair.
And it really does sort of echo back to
to Joe's question in the sense that you
take something like the the relationship
between Russia and China pre Ukraine war
or pre2022 version of the Ukraine war.
For 15 years before that, there had been
an established talking point amongst
pretty much all political analysts,
which was it's an alliance. It's an axis
of convenience, right? They get along,
they work together, but they don't
really trust each other. They don't
really love each other. And so you you
knew that when push comes to shove, when
they had to like put their interest
above the other, etc. You knew which way
it was going to go. That was very
unclear for the first like year. And and
frankly, some could argue it's still
unclear post Russia invasion, right? or
Ukraine invasion. Are they now in it
forever and sort of Russia basically
China is grooming Russia to help it when
it goes after Taiwan or is it still very
much an access of convenience where the
Chinese might cut off you know drone
inputs to the Russians for the right
price if there's American export control
lifting or something like that right and
to your question Tracy the fact that so
much stuff is changing so fast means
that you have even less historical
background or historical data which as
we said earlier you're already starting
with very very small data sets, right?
And so the temptation there is to kind
of just make it up as you go and that's
where things get dicey.
Do you think that's possible like that
China has a price for which it would
hold back on Russian access to drone
materials and such?
So my answer to that would be in a way
that one is actually not that hard
because even if there were a price, we
are so far from being willing to pay
that price that it's not going to it's
never going to see the light of day.
What's a surprise thing that you think
is not on anyone's radar right now
geopolitically that you think we should
be focusing more on? This is my way of
soliciting ideas for future episodes, by
the way.
Yeah. Yeah. No, I so I actually I love
that question because but I I hope this
is not going to be disappointing, but
I it is.
I always say like the whole black swan
thing is irrelevant. Like black swans
almost never happen. The stuff that
blows up in our face is stuff that is
visible pretty far ahead like not
necessarily far ahead of time but that
is pretty obvious and the difficulty is
for the analyst predicting the details
right like in what month is Putin going
to invade or whatever or what part of
Ukraine is he going to invade
and the other difficulty for for clients
of course is how to trade that right
given that you can get radically
different outcomes but the events
themselves I mean there were four or
five months of Russian buildup in in
front of Ukraine And in you know
December January people were still
debating whether it's going to happen or
not. And another example is CO. People
talked about CO as a black swan. I mean
if you read any of those you know world
economic reform global risk reports for
the past like 15 years pandemics were
always top 10 like or even top five.
People knew that pandemics were a major
potential business risk. So again it's
it's more like the the details rather
than something's going to just pop up in
our face.
In the next I don't know 5 years. Do you
expect China to invade Taiwan?
Yes. Uh if if I mean the word invade is
the one that bugs me, okay, which is not
not going to surprise you because I
think that it's more likely to be a
blockade for example than an actual
amphibious invasion. So So that view for
example is pretty I think banel, right?
The problem is again from the perception
of how do you manage it? One of the
things that I think is totally
underappreciated is everyone knows that
a blockade is a risk, right? But the
part that's totally underappreciated is
that the Chinese could roll it out
literally overnight. So I think what is
underappreciated is we're not going to
get any buildup. We're going to wake up
one morning and it's going to be done.
So that's one problem. A second problem
is a bloodless blockade that lasts, you
know, 3 months or 6 months that is
essentially a continuous anaconda
squeeze on Taiwan and the Taiwanese
economy could actually be far worse from
a purely market perspective. Forget
about, you know, normative aspects. far
worse than a one-month war regardless of
the outcome, right? Because it's the
length of the disruption for business
operations that that could be most
problematic. So again, it's it's how you
look at it, I think, that that can make
a difference.
Back in college, I wrote an
essay/dissertation
on the chances of China, you know,
invading Taiwan or going after Taiwan.
And I think I had my base case was they
were going to do something before the
2008 Olympics. So, uh, yeah, I I
you empathize with the difficulty of
timing.
I totally do, Andrew. That was
fantastic. Thank you so much for coming
on Off Lots.
Thanks, Andrew. That was great.
Thank you,
[Music]
Joe. There was a lot to pick out of that
conversation. I think one of the things
that struck me, okay, first of all, you
know, he was talking about black swans,
and this is something that Taleb himself
pointed out at our recent live event,
which is we shouldn't really be worried
about black swans because they are by
their very nature unknowable. We should
be worried about the gray swans like a
pandemic. I think that makes a lot of
sense. Secondly, the emphasis on
motivation
was really interesting to me because
this is something that I have wondered
about the tariffs. If Trump needs to
have a bunch of tariff deals to have his
trade war seem to be a success, then
what does that mean on the revenue side?
Because he has also talked about how
tariff revenue is going to offset a
bunch of tax cuts and things like that.
So, I I do think it's important and I
still haven't figured out that one
particularly. And then the other thing
is he was talking about Trump's advisors
and this is something I hadn't realized,
but he's right. The one thing they can't
do is limit the president's optionality.
Yeah.
It seems like they can throw out pretty
much any scenario, any response, any
possibility that they want, but they
can't do anything that would box him or
pigeon hole into one position. That was
interesting. Yeah, you know, by the way,
just going back to Andrew's note that we
kept referencing on uh June 16th, he had
underestimated the odds that the US
would intervene as he did. However, I to
his credit, here were his final
takeaways.
US intervention is certainly possible,
but still not base case. Okay, it did
happen. However, he says likewise,
regime change is plausible, but still
unlikely. So, he was right on that. And
then he said, "The overwhelming majority
of scenarios end in a negotiated Iran
capitulation with no meaningful damage
done to global oil supply or Gulf
assets." I think that's a pretty good
conclusion that at the end of the day,
cuz if you figure people care about the
markets and oil supply, more or less a
useful conclusion to have been able to
make on June 16th. I have to say the
speed with which Andrew answered, "Yes,
there is going to be something in
Taiwan." It's boring, isn't it? freaked
that I was like I was hoping that he
would hum and haw a little bit about
that and then this idea that it's just
going to happen so quickly it'll be
overnight. There's we're not going to
get any signs of it and then the world
is going to change dramatically the next
morning in ways that we don't really
know.
Well, on the other hand, there are
people like me who have been saying with
great confidence that this is going to
happen for a while and it doesn't. So
maybe that's that's some hope for you,
Joe. I mean for me I mean for lots of
people certainly hope there is not
anyway
um the other thing I was
I just didn't like how how comfortably
he was asked because I in five years yes
he didn't have seem to have any doubt
the other thing I was thinking we
probably should have asked this but the
time frames for things cuz you mentioned
regime change in Iran like okay well it
hasn't happened but it's also been 2
weeks since we had this big big event
that happened and I don't think it's
necessarily off the table so I'd be
curious curious to figure out how he
thinks about like the time frame of
possibilities as well. But oh well, we
already spoke for about 45 minutes, so
we should probably leave it there.
Let's leave it there.
This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy.
And I'm Joe Wisenthal. You can follow me
at the stalwart. Follow our guest Andrew
Bishop. He's at andrew_d_bishop.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Arman, Dashel Bennett at Dashbot,
and Kale Brooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we try to dig into what exactly
geopolitical risk analysis actually is,
then please leave us a positive review
on your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]